# TLCL

* add a script to the PATH:
  * PATH variable: list of directories to be searched for executables
  * personal use: ~/bin
  * locally supplied software (compiled or not):
    * every one's use: /usr/local/bin
    * system administrator's use: /usr/local/sbin
  * file supplied by Linux distributor:
    * /bin
    * /usr/bin
  * export PATH=~/bin:`"$PATH"`
  * source: `. .bashrc`

## [[bash IF statement]]

# [[useful bash]]


# 20

`cat`:

`-A` display non-printing characters

`-n` numbered lines

`-s` remove extra blank lines

`sort`:

`sort file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt > final_sorted_list.txt` sorts into
one

`du -s /usr/share/* | sort -nr | head` 10 largest space usages

on something like this: `Fedora 10 11/25/2008`:

`ls -l /usr/bin | sort -nrk 5 | head` sorts by a key, using the fifth field

`sort --key=1,1 --key=2n distros.txt` multiple -k, first start with the first
field until it's end, second, the second field in numerical order.

`sort -k 3.7nbr -k 3.1nbr -k 3.4nbr distros.txt` first, a key that begins at
the seventh character within the third field

`uniq`:

`sort foo.txt | uniq` we need sort because it removes adjacent lines

`sort foo.txt | uniq -c` number of duplicates.

`cut`:

`cut -f 3 distros.txt | cut -c 7-10` extracts the third tab-delimited field,
then character positions 7 through 10

`cut -d ':' -f 1 /etc/passwd | head` specifying another field delimiter

# other usefull commands

Network:
`netstat -i` more packet info, listing and forwarding to where
`nc -z -v bootstrap-it.com 443 80` checking multiple ports

logs:
`journalctl -n 20` the last 20 entries
`journalctl -p emerg` emergency logs
`journalctl -f` live
`journalctl --since 15:50:00 --until 15:52:00` filter logs

All the logs generated by events on a syslogd system are added to the `/var/log/syslog`
lso see entire directories like `/var/log/apache2/` or `/var/log/mysql/`
`cat /var/log/auth.log | grep -B 1 -A 1 failure `grep one line before and after the match.

OpenVPN:

To permit internal routing between network interfaces on the server, you’ll need to
uncomment a single line (net.ipv4.ip_forward=1) in the /etc/sysctl.conf file. This
allows remote clients to be redirected as needed once they’re connected. To load the
new setting, run sysctl -p.

# 34

# parameter expansion, command substitution

`$a` becomes whatever the variable contains

`${a}_file` not to confuse the shell

`{11}` to access the eleventh positional parameter

`echo ${foo:-"substitute value if unset"}` if  empty, will show the quoted stuff.
`echo ${foo:="default value if unset"}` if empty, the quoted will be assigned to foo as well as showing it.
`echo ${foo:?"parameter is empty"}` if empty, the quoted will be sent to standard error.
`echo ${foo:+"substitute value if set"}` if NOT empty, the quoted will be shown (not assigned).


`touch`: set or update the access, change and modify times of files or creating
an empty file if it doesn't exist.

`stat`: reveals everything the system knows about a file and it's attributes.

***

`gzip`: compress one or more files.

`gunzip -c foo.txt | less`: view the contents. = `zcat`

`tar`: archiving files.

`rsync`: synchronizing local and remote directories.

***

`join`: joining columns of multiple files based on a shared one.

`join distros-key-names.txt distros-key-vernums.txt | head`

`comm`: given two text files, displays unique lines (cols 1,2) and the shared ones (col 3).

`comm -12 file1.txt file2.txt` suppressing cols 1,2 and just showing 3.

# `diff [file1] [file2]`; compare files
    
  describes the changes required to convert the first file to the second one.

  * `-u`: unified format
  * `-c`: context format
  * `-y`: compares side by side

`patch`: takes input from `diff` and changes older versions to newer.

`diff -Naur old_file new_file > diff_file` then `patch < diff_file`

`tr`: translation, character based search and replace.

`echo "lowercase letters" | tr a-z A-Z` converts characters to uppercase.

`tr -d '\r' < dos_file > unix_file` converts a dos file to Unix by removing
carriage return.

`echo 'aaabbbccc' | tr -s abc` squeeze, delete repeated characters.

* `sed -i 's/lazy/laxy/; s/jumped/jimped/' foo.txt` i, in place, changes the
  document.

`aspell -H check foo.txt` spell check without checking html tags.

***

`nl` numbers lines

`fold`

`| fold -w 12` breaks after 12 character, regardless of word boundaries.
`| fold -w 12 -s` breaks at the last available space before 12 is reached.

`fmt`

`fmt -cw 50 fmt-info.txt` formats into 50 character wide columns and preserves
the indentation of the first two lines (-c) and doing the rest based on the
second line.

`fmt -w 50 -p '# ' fmt-code.txt` format the lines started with "# "

***

while commands; do commands; done
    `break;` terminated the loop
    `continue` the remainder to be skipped and resumes the next iteration

### bash read files:

- use IFS to set delimiter, default is " ".

- The shell allows one or more variable assignments to take place immediately
before a command. These assignments alter the environment for the command that
follows.

```sh
IFS=":" read user pw uid gid name home shell <<< $(grep "proxy" /etc/passwd); echo $user $pw $uid
```

`[[ -d "$dir_name" ]] && cd "$dir_name" && rm *` test if the directory exists,
then remove the contests.

`
if ! cd "$dir_name"; then
echo "Cannot cd to '$dir_name'" >&2
exit 1
fi
`
if failed, send a message to standard error.

always precede wildcards (such as * and ?) with ./ to prevent misinterpretation
by commands. This includes things like *.pdf and ???.mp3

how to trace on a part of a script
`
set -x # Turn on tracing
if [ $number = 1 ]; then
echo "Number is equal to 1."
else
echo "Number is not equal to 1."
fi
set +x # Turn off tracing
`

The addition of the `;;&` syntax allows case to continue to the next test rather than sim-
ply terminating.

`for i in A B C D; do echo $i; done `
`for i in distros*.txt; do echo "$i"; done`
`for i in {A..D}; do echo $i; done`

* 34

## string manipulation (here and before)

`echo ${!BASH*}` list all the variables that beings with "BASH".
`echo "'$foo' is ${#foo} characters long."` expands into the length of foo.

`echo ${foo:5}` extracts after the fifth character to the end
`echo ${foo:5:6}` six characters after fifth.
`echo ${foo: -5:2}` if negative, from the end of the string.

if `foo=file.txt.zip`
`echo ${foo#*.} #txt.zip` removes the shortest match
`echo ${foo##*.} #zip   ` removes the longest match
`echo ${foo%.*} #file.txt` removes from the end of the string
`echo ${foo%%.*} #file`    removes the longest from the end of the string

if `foo=JPG.JPG`
`echo ${foo/JPG/jpg} ` #jpg.JPG just the first instance
`echo ${foo//JPG/jpg}` #jpg.jpg all occurrences
`echo ${foo/#JPG/jpg}` #jpg.JPG match at the beginning of the string
`echo ${foo/%JPG/jpg}` #JPG.jpg match at the end

`
declare -u upper
declare -l lower
`
declares a variable to always be uppercase or lowercase, no matter the input.

`${1,,}` to lower case,
`${1,} ` only the first character to lowercase
`${1^^}` all uppercase
`${1^} ` only the first to upper

# arithmetic expansion

`echo $((0xff))` #255, hex
`echo $((2#11111111))` #255, `2#` makes it be expanded as binary

`if (( foo = 5 ));` assigns 5 to foo, also evolutes to true.
`((a<1?++a:--a))` if the first one is true, the second one is performed,
otherwise the third one.

`bc < foo.bc` passing via standard input
`bc <<< "2+2"` passing here string

# array

a[1]=foo
echo ${a[1]}

define:
  * `declare -a a` another way of creating an array
  * `a=()`
  * or just use it: `a+=<something>`

`days=(Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat)`
`days=([0]=Sun [1]=Mon [2]=Tue [3]=Wed [4]=Thu [5]=Fri [6]=Sat)`
assigning multiple values

`for i in ${animals[@]}; do echo $i; done` outputs the contents of the array
`for i in "${animals[@]}"; do echo $i; done` each element in one line
`echo ${#a[@]}`  # number of array elements
`echo ${#a[100]}`  # length of element 100

`for i in "${!foo[@]}"; do echo $i; done` returns the keys in an array that actually have a value
`${foo[@]}` get the values.

`foo+=(d e f)` append, it should be inside `()`
`a_sorted=($(for i in "${a[@]}"; do echo $i; done | sort))`

sorts the array

`unset foo `deletes an array
`unset 'foo[0]'`  deletes a single element, quoted to prevent pathname expansion.
`foo=(a b c d e f)`
foo=

`
echo ${foo[@]} # b c d e f, just empties the first element
`
# exotica

`{ ls -l; echo "Listing of foo.txt"; cat foo.txt; } > output.txt` group command,
executes in the current shell
`ls -l; echo "Listing of foo.txt"; cat foo.txt) > output.txt` sub shell, executes
in a child copy of the current shell

## Process Substitution: needed because we loose the environments in piping.
`<(list of commands)` produce standard output
`>(list of commands)` take standard input

` < <(...)` redirects the output of the process substitution as the input to the
command.

## traps

signal handling routine in scripts

`trap "echo 'I am ignoring you.'" SIGINT SIGTERM` when either signals are
received, the echo commands will execute.

`tempfile=$(mktemp /tmp/foobar.$$.XXXXXXXXXX) creating temporary files`

## asynchronous

`
async-child &
pid=$!          # contains the process ID of the last job
wait "$pid"     # waiting for the child to finish
`

## pipes

* `>` : overwrite/ create a new file
* `>>`: append to a file
* `2>`: redirect errors
* `&>`: redirect both standard error and output to the same file
    * `command > file 2>&1`; POSIX-compliant, does the same, first output, then appends the
      error (2) to 1
EX: `command &> /dev/null`

## Named Pipes

a type of file
creates connection between two processes

`
process1 > named_pipe
process2 < named_pipe
`

and it will behave like this:
`process1 | process2`

`
$ mkfifo pipe1
$ ls -l pipe1
prw-r--r-- 1 me   me    0 2009-07-17 06:41 pipe1
`
# positional parameter

`${255}` to access more than one digit parameters
`$#` number of parameteres

# case

`shift`: positional arguments - 1, `$2` becomes `$1`, as if the indexes moved forward.
this is how the script knows what will be after a flag:

`
while [[ -n "$1" ]]; do                         # continue while $1 isn't empty
    case "$1" in                                # to check if it maches any of the flags
        -f | --file)
                        shift
                        filename="$1"
                        ;;
    esac
    shift
done
`

`basename "$0"` removes the leaning portions of a pathname.

`$FUNCNAME` currently executed function

to get a list of positional parameters, use `"$@"`: if used with double quotes, it will separate each double quoted string, if not, each will be considered a separate positional argument separated by space.



# useful combinations

get number of files: `ls <file> | wc -l`

# string manipulation

# regex

literal characters: characters that *match themselves*
meta characters: to specify more complex matches: `^ $ . [ ] { } - ? * + ( ) | \`
`\`: used to escape literals to meta or escape meta to be literal.

## any character

`.` matches any character in that character position.
`'.zip'`:  anything at the start and end

## anchor

`^` (caret) start and `$` end of the line.
`'^$'`: will match blank lines
`'^zip$`: the ones with only `zip`.

## bracket expression

in brackets, meta characters are considered literals

`[bg]zip`: match one from a list of characters.
`'[bg]zip'`: only `b` or `g` before zip.
`[^bg]zip`: negation; without these characters at the given position.

## character ranges

to specify sets of characters

`^[A-Z]`: starts with uppercase
`^[a-Za-z0-9]`: matches everything that starts with letters and numbers
`[A-Z]`: every filename with an uppercase letter
`[-AZ]`: every file name that has either of these.

## POSIX character classes

another way of specifying ranges.

ASCII collation order: `ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZabcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz`
dictionary order: `aAbBcCdDeEfFgGhHiIjJkKlLmMnNoOpPqQrRsStTuUvVwWxXyYzZ`

in locale based settings, the POSIX-compliant apps use a dictionary order. so [A-Z] in
dictionary order is all but character `a`.

POSIX standard includes a number of character classes that provide useful ranges of
characters:

`[:alnum:]`: [A-Za-z0-9]
`[:alpha:]`: [A-Za-z]
`[:space:]`: The whitespace characters including space, tab, carriage return, newline and ...
`[:digit:]`: The numerals 0 through 9.
`[:blank:]`: Includes the space and tab characters

## POSIX basic and extended regex (BRE vs ERE)

they differ in meta character:

BRE: `^ $ . [ ] *`
ERE: `( ) { } ? + |`

* `( ) { }` will be *meta* if escaped in BRE.
* any ERE meta characters will be literal if escaped.

all the rest need `-E`

## alternation

`'AAA|BBB'`: match either strings, could be more.
`'^(bz|gz|zip)'`: with other regex exp. in this case; the ones that start with either
`^bz|gz|zip`: either starts with `bz` or contains the other ones.

## quantifiers

the number of times something is matched

### `?`: makes the element optional. zero or once

`^\(?[0-9][0-9][0-9]\)?`: `( )` are optional and also escaped to be literal.

### `*`: zero or more

`[[:upper:][:lower:] ]*\.`: as much upper or lower case or spaces and ends with a literal
period.

### `+`: at least one

`^([[:alpha:]]+ ?)+$`: starts with one or more alphabetical character, one space or not, and
at least one of these.

### `{ }`: match a specific number of times

`{n}`: match if occurred n times
`{n,m}`: at least n, but not more than m
`{n,}`: n or more
`{,m}`: no more than m

`^\(?[0-9]{3}\)?`: match 3 times

* sed: performs a command on each line
  * substitution: `s/search/replace/`, `1s/...`: the first line
    * g: search-and-replace globally to a line, not just to the first
      instance.
  * `-n '1,5p' <file>`: -n: no auto print, -p: print
  * `-n '/suse/!p' <file>`: everything except regex.
  * back reference: use regex found in search, in replace
    * subexpression: add () around desired part of the regex in search.
    * reference: \n: \1-\2-\3
  * sed uses BRE, so we have to escape ERE metacharacters so that they
    won't be considered literals.  also the `s` command will be confused
    with extra `/`s.  's/([0-9]{2})/([0-9]{2})/([0-9]{4})$/\3-\1-\2/'
    's/\([0-9]\{2\}\)\/\([0-9]\{2\}\)\/\([0-9]\{4\}\)$/\3-\1-\2/'


`sed -n '/^[0-9]/s:/README.md::p'`
`s:/README.md::` Removes `/README.md` from matching lines.

(?<=...) is called a positive lookbehind in regular expressions.
What it does:

It ensures that a specific pattern comes before your match — but it doesn't include that pattern in the actual match result.

## awk

`awk {print $1}`: get the first column
`echo $(awk -v keyword="$1" ...` how to pass arguments to it.

# working with files

```sh
> file                              # creates a file
echo "heading" > file               # adds to the file, removing the previous contests
echo "body"    >> file              # appens to the file
```

## printf

`printf "%s\n" "$match"` if match is multi-lined this will print it preserving new lines.

`ls`
- `-h`: human readable
* `-a`: show hidden files.
* `-ld`: more details of directories.
* `-d *`: everything, if dir, just their names
* `-v`: sort by numbers

# administration

`df -h` to see used space
`fdisk -l` disk info
`vgdisplay` to see unallocated space in the volume group

## Extend the Logical Volume

This command assigns all the remaining free space in the volume group to the logical volume.
`sudo lvextend -l +100%FREE /dev/mapper/ubuntu--vg-ubuntu--lv`

## Resize the Filesystem

After extending the logical volume, resize the filesystem to use the new space:
`sudo resize2fs /dev/mapper/ubuntu--vg-ubuntu--lv`
